In this lecture, you'll learn about the advanced OSPF topics of the router ID,
how to configure passive interfaces, and default injection.
So, we'll start off with the router ID.
This is very similar to how the router ID work for EIGRP as well. So our OSPF routers identify
themselves to other OSPF routers using an OSPF router ID, which is in the form of an IPv4 address.
It defaults to using the highest IP address of any loopback interfaces configured on the router, or if there's
no loopback interfaces,
it will use the highest other IP address. Loopback interfaces
never go down, so the router ID will not change if you use a loopback.
You can also manually specify the router ID.
Best practice is to use a loopback or manually set an ID, so it won't change, makes things more stable
by doing that.
So if you haven't used or you haven't configured a loopback address on your router, you can
see an example here on R1, I've done a 'show ip interface brief'.
There's no loopbacks configured there.
The highest IP address is 10.0.3.1, which is on interface FastEthernet3/0, so that will be
selected as the router ID. We can verify that by using the 'show ip protocols' command.
So we do that, and we can see that, yes, the router ID is 10.0.3.1.
Next example, we just 'show ip interface brief' and this time, we do have a loopback interface.
We've got Loopback0 with IP address 1.1.1.1.
So even though it's lower than the physical address is, because it's a loopback, this is going to be preferred
as the router ID.
Again, we can verify that with the 'show protocols' command.
Now, if you've got a router and you've just got physical IP addresses on there, and you've already got OSPF
configured, and then, you configure a loopback afterwards,
it's not going to immediately update the router ID. To change to the loopback,
you would need to restart the OSPF process by rebooting the router or by shutting down and then restarting OSPF.
Obviously, in a production environment,
you would just wait until the next reboot because disabling and re-enabling OSPF would be disruptive.
The command if you want to manually configure it is under the 'router ospf' configuration, 'router-id', and
then the ID that you want to use, in the format of an IP version 4 (IPv4) address. The address that you use
doesn't have to actually be configured on the router. You could just make up a new address.
However, it's more logical and easier for troubleshooting if you do use an IP address that is actually
configured on the router.
Okay, so that was the router ID.
Next up is passive interfaces. If you configure a passive interface, it will be advertised in OSPF. So other
routers will learn how to get to that network,
but the interface itself will not try to form any adjacencies, and it won't give out any internal information.
You see in our example here, we've got router R1, which has got a loopback interface
and on interface FastEthernet2/0,
it's connected to R6, which in our example, belongs to another organization. So, it's best practice
to configure your loopbacks as passive interfaces.
They're not physical interfaces, so there can't be a physical router on the other end of the link to
form an adjacency with.
So, it's more efficient. Rather than sending out OSPF information, we'll make it a passive interface.
Now, we have to include it as a passive interface, so that your other routers will learn how to get to
that loopback address, and we're also going to make FastEthernet2/0 a passive interface.
Again, we want our other internal routers to know how to get to that network, but we don't want to be giving out
any of our own internal information
out on that link. That would be a security issue. So to configure this, we say 'router ospf 1' at global config,
and then under the OSPF configuration, 'passive-interface loopback 0'
and 'passive-interface FastEthernet2/0'.
If more of your interfaces are passive rather than active interfaces, then you can set passive interface
as the default. So here, this configuration is going to do exactly the same as we did on the previous slide.
We say 'router ospf 1' on router R1, and then 'passive-interface default', which will make all
our interfaces passive.
Then, we say 'no passive-interface FastEthernet0/0', 'no passive-interface FastEthernet1/0',
and 'no passive-interface FastEthernet3/0', so that the router will form adjacencies on those links.
So, that was our passive interfaces.
Last thing to cover is
default route injection,
and this is configured in a similar way as what it was for RIP.
So the example here, we've got R4 is connected out to an Internet Service Provider (ISP), so we configure
a static default route on R4 with the command
'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
and the next hop address of '203.0.113.2'.
We don't want to have to configure static routes to get out to the Internet on all of our routers,
we want them to learn that dynamically,
so we're going to inject it into the OSPF process on router R4. The command to do that is 'router ospf 1',
and then, 'default-information originate'.
It look for a default route on the router, and it will inject that into OSPF. To verify it,
do a 'show ip route' on your other routers, and check that they do have a default route to the 0.0.0.0
network.
This will show up as an external route in OSPF.
What an external route is,
it doesn't mean it's come from somewhere outside your organization.
What it means is that the route was redistributed into OSPF. What redistribution is is when we take a
route from another source, like another routing protocol
or it could be a static route,
and we inject that into OSPF. Okay, so again, external does not mean it's outside.
It literally means it was redistributed into OSPF. So this was a default static route that we've redistributed
into OSPF, so it shows up as an external route when you view the routing table.
Okay.
So that was our advanced topics.
Next lecture,
we'll configure it on the lab.